README.md, before:

# DSMR Smart Meter MQTT Client

Lightweight containerized Dutch Smart Meter (_Slimme Meter_) to MQTT
software, with automatic Home Assistant integration.

Uses [paho-mqtt](https://pypi.org/project/paho-mqtt/) and
[ndokter/dsmr_parser](https://github.com/ndokter/dsmr_parser) to do the
heavy lifting.

## Is this you?
You've been running Home Assistant on a Raspberry Pi in the _meterkast_
for a while. You've hooked it up directly to your Smart Meter with
a USB cable, and you're happily using the built-in [DSMR Slimme
Meter](https://www.home-assistant.io/integrations/dsmr/) integration.

But now you want to move Home Assistant to a server in the attic,
without physical access to your Smart Meter. You want to use the MQTT protocol to
let the Raspberry Pi in the _meterkast_ smoothly communicate with Home
Assistant upstairs. You want a turn-key, easy to configure, well-engineered
application for the job.

Then mqtt4dsmr is right for you!

## Usage
The examples use `podman` since I'm more familiar with it than `docker`,
but they should be relatively interchangeable.

### Trying it out
When using rootless containers, make sure your user has the right group
membership to access serial ports (this is why the `--gorup-add` option
is there). On Fedora Linux this group is called `dialout`.

```
podman run -d                                             \
    --name mqtt4dsmr                                      \
    --group-add keep-groups                               \
    --tz=local                                            \
    --env MQTT_HOST=mqtt.home.example.org                 \
    --env MQTT_PORT=1883                                  \
    --env MQTT_USERNAME=my_user                           \
    --env MQTT_PASSWORD=my_password                       \
    --device /dev/serial/by-id/usb-MY_DEVICE:/dev/ttyDSMR \
    ghcr.io/antonijn/mqtt4dsmr
```

### Automated execution
Put the following in `~/.config/containers/systemd/mqtt4dsmr.container`:

```
[Unit]
Description=De Slimme Meter MQTT Client
After=network-online.target

[Container]
ContainerName=mqtt4dsmr
Image=ghcr.io/antonijn/mqtt4dsmr:latest
Annotation=run.oci.keep_original_groups=1
Environment=MQTT_HOST=mqtt.home.example.org
Environment=MQTT_PORT=1883
Environment=MQTT_USERNAME=my_user
Environment=MQTT_PASSWORD=my_password
AddDevice=/dev/serial/by-id/usb-MY_DEVICE:/dev/ttyDSMR
Timezone=local

[Service]
Restart=always

[Install]
WantedBy=default.target
```

Use additional environment variables as required, per the documentation
below.

Enable the container using `systemctl --user start mqtt4dsmr`. To
automatically start the daemon at system start-up while using rootless
containers, enable lingering for your user: `loginctl enable-linger <my-user>`.

## Options
Options must be given to the container as environment variables.
<table>
<tr>
<td>Option</td>
<td>Description</td>
<td>Default</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`MQTT_HOST`

</td>
<td>

IP address or URL for MQTT broker.

</td>
<td>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`MQTT_PORT`

</td>
<td>

Broker MQTT port. If set to 8883 and `MQTT_TLS` is not
explicitly defined, then `MQTT_TLS` defaults to `true` (Optional).

</td>
<td>

1883

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`MQTT_USERNAME`

</td>
<td>

MQTT username. (Optional)

</td>
<td>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`MQTT_PASSWORD`

</td>
<td>

MQTT password. (Optional if `MQTT_USERNAME` is not set)

</td>
<td>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`MQTT_TLS`

</td>
<td>

Use MQTT over TLS. If set to `true` and `MQTT_PORT` is not
explicitly defined, then `MQTT_PORT` defaults to 8883. (Optional)

</td>
<td>

`false`

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`MQTT_TLS_INSECURE`

</td>
<td>

Disable hostname verification for MQTT over TLS. (Optional)

</td>
<td>

`false`

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`MQTT_CA_CERTS`

</td>
<td>

CA bundle file for broker verification. Only relevant for MQTT
over TLS. (Optional)

</td>
<td>

system CA bundle

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`MQTT_CERTFILE`

</td>
<td>

Client certificate for authentication. (Optional)

</td>
<td>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`MQTT_KEYFILE`

</td>
<td>

Client keyfile for authentication. (Optional)

</td>
<td>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`MQTT_TOPIC_PREFIX`

</td>
<td>

Topic prefix for application MQTT traffic. You should probably
not change the default values unless you know it will conflict.
(Optional)

</td>
<td>

`dsmr`

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`HA_DEVICE_ID`

</td>
<td>

Home Assistant internal device ID. You should probably not
change the default values unless you know it will conflict.
(Optional)

</td>
<td>

`dsmr`

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`HA_DISCOVERY_PREFIX`

</td>
<td>

Home Assistant discovery prefix. This should match the value
you have configured in your Home Assistant MQTT integration.
If you have not configured such a value, then don't change this
option. (Optional)

</td>
<td>

`homeassistant`

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`DSMR_VERSION`

</td>
<td>

Dutch Smart Meter Specification version. Can be one of
`AUSTRIA_ENERGIENETZE_STEIERMARK`, `BELGIUM_FLUVIUS`,
`EON_HUNGARY`, `ISKRA_IE`, `LUXEMBOURG_SMARTY`, `Q3D`,
`SAGEMCOM_T210_D_R`, `SWEDEN`, `V2_2`, `V3`, `V4`, `V5`. See
[ndokter/dsmr_parser](https://github.com/ndokter/dsmr_parser)
for more information. (Optional)

</td>
<td>

`V4`

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`SERIAL_SETTINGS`

</td>
<td>

Serial settings. Is probably related to your `DSMR_VERSION`
setting. Worth playing around with if things don't work
initially. Can be one of `V2_2`, `V4`, `V5`. See
[ndokter/dsmr_parser](https://github.com/ndokter/dsmr_parser)
for more information. (Optional)

</td>
<td>

`V4`

</td>
</tr>
</table>

Commit message:

Add demo image to readme

README.md, after:

# DSMR Smart Meter MQTT Client

Lightweight containerized Dutch Smart Meter (_Slimme Meter_) to MQTT
software, with automatic Home Assistant integration.

Uses [paho-mqtt](https://pypi.org/project/paho-mqtt/) and
[ndokter/dsmr_parser](https://github.com/ndokter/dsmr_parser) to do the
heavy lifting.

![Automatic Home Assistant Discovery Demo](./sensor.png)

## Is this you?
You've been running Home Assistant on a Raspberry Pi in the _meterkast_
for a while. You've hooked it up directly to your Smart Meter with
a USB cable, and you're happily using the built-in [DSMR Slimme
Meter](https://www.home-assistant.io/integrations/dsmr/) integration.

But now you want to move Home Assistant to a server in the attic,
without physical access to your Smart Meter. You want to use the MQTT protocol to
let the Raspberry Pi in the _meterkast_ smoothly communicate with Home
Assistant upstairs. You want a turn-key, easy to configure, well-engineered
application for the job.

Then mqtt4dsmr is right for you!

## Usage
The examples use `podman` since I'm more familiar with it than `docker`,
but they should be relatively interchangeable.

### Trying it out
When using rootless containers, make sure your user has the right group
membership to access serial ports (this is why the `--group-add` option
is there). On Fedora Linux this group is called `dialout`.

```
podman run -d                                             \
    --name mqtt4dsmr                                      \
    --group-add keep-groups                               \
    --tz=local                                            \
    --env MQTT_HOST=mqtt.home.example.org                 \
    --env MQTT_PORT=1883                                  \
    --env MQTT_USERNAME=my_user                           \
    --env MQTT_PASSWORD=my_password                       \
    --device /dev/serial/by-id/usb-MY_DEVICE:/dev/ttyDSMR \
    ghcr.io/antonijn/mqtt4dsmr
```

### Automated execution
Put the following in `~/.config/containers/systemd/mqtt4dsmr.container`:

```
[Unit]
Description=De Slimme Meter MQTT Client
After=network-online.target

[Container]
ContainerName=mqtt4dsmr
Image=ghcr.io/antonijn/mqtt4dsmr:latest
Annotation=run.oci.keep_original_groups=1
Environment=MQTT_HOST=mqtt.home.example.org
Environment=MQTT_PORT=1883
Environment=MQTT_USERNAME=my_user
Environment=MQTT_PASSWORD=my_password
AddDevice=/dev/serial/by-id/usb-MY_DEVICE:/dev/ttyDSMR
Timezone=local

[Service]
Restart=always

[Install]
WantedBy=default.target
```

Use additional environment variables as required, per the documentation
below.

Enable the container using `systemctl --user start mqtt4dsmr`. To
automatically start the daemon at system start-up while using rootless
containers, enable lingering for your user: `loginctl enable-linger <my-user>`.

## Options
Options must be given to the container as environment variables.
<table>
<tr>
<td>Option</td>
<td>Description</td>
<td>Default</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`MQTT_HOST`

</td>
<td>

IP address or URL for MQTT broker.

</td>
<td>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`MQTT_PORT`

</td>
<td>

Broker MQTT port. If set to 8883 and `MQTT_TLS` is not
explicitly defined, then `MQTT_TLS` defaults to `true` (Optional).

</td>
<td>

1883

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`MQTT_USERNAME`

</td>
<td>

MQTT username. (Optional)

</td>
<td>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`MQTT_PASSWORD`

</td>
<td>

MQTT password. (Optional if `MQTT_USERNAME` is not set)

</td>
<td>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`MQTT_TLS`

</td>
<td>

Use MQTT over TLS. If set to `true` and `MQTT_PORT` is not
explicitly defined, then `MQTT_PORT` defaults to 8883. (Optional)

</td>
<td>

`false`

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`MQTT_TLS_INSECURE`

</td>
<td>

Disable hostname verification for MQTT over TLS. (Optional)

</td>
<td>

`false`

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`MQTT_CA_CERTS`

</td>
<td>

CA bundle file for broker verification. Only relevant for MQTT
over TLS. (Optional)

</td>
<td>

system CA bundle

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`MQTT_CERTFILE`

</td>
<td>

Client certificate for authentication. (Optional)

</td>
<td>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`MQTT_KEYFILE`

</td>
<td>

Client keyfile for authentication. (Optional)

</td>
<td>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`MQTT_TOPIC_PREFIX`

</td>
<td>

Topic prefix for application MQTT traffic. You should probably
not change the default values unless you know it will conflict.
(Optional)

</td>
<td>

`dsmr`

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`HA_DEVICE_ID`

</td>
<td>

Home Assistant internal device ID. You should probably not
change the default values unless you know it will conflict.
(Optional)

</td>
<td>

`dsmr`

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`HA_DISCOVERY_PREFIX`

</td>
<td>

Home Assistant discovery prefix. This should match the value
you have configured in your Home Assistant MQTT integration.
If you have not configured such a value, then don't change this
option. (Optional)

</td>
<td>

`homeassistant`

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`DSMR_VERSION`

</td>
<td>

Dutch Smart Meter Specification version. Can be one of
`AUSTRIA_ENERGIENETZE_STEIERMARK`, `BELGIUM_FLUVIUS`,
`EON_HUNGARY`, `ISKRA_IE`, `LUXEMBOURG_SMARTY`, `Q3D`,
`SAGEMCOM_T210_D_R`, `SWEDEN`, `V2_2`, `V3`, `V4`, `V5`. See
[ndokter/dsmr_parser](https://github.com/ndokter/dsmr_parser)
for more information. (Optional)

</td>
<td>

`V4`

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

`SERIAL_SETTINGS`

</td>
<td>

Serial settings. Is probably related to your `DSMR_VERSION`
setting. Worth playing around with if things don't work
initially. Can be one of `V2_2`, `V4`, `V5`. See
[ndokter/dsmr_parser](https://github.com/ndokter/dsmr_parser)
for more information. (Optional)

</td>
<td>

`V4`

</td>
</tr>
</table>
